# Finance Essentials

## Using Financial Tools in Context

1. Calculating Present Value

- Present Value: how much a future sum of money is worth today
  - PV = FV / (1 + r)^t

2. Project Valuation and Business Planning for a start-up

- Net Present Value (NPV): the net value of a series of presetn values, that is the sum of each cash in/outflow discounted back to its present value.
  - If the NPV of a project is positive, it is worth taking.
  - NPV = t = 0 to t = T SUM of CF<sub>t</sub>/(1+r)<sup>t</sup>

3. Calculating Internal Rate of Return

- Caculate the profit of potential investment.
- IRR is a discount rate that makes the net present value of all cash flows from a particular project equal to zero.
- NPV(r<sub>IRR</sub>) = t = 0 to t = T SUM of CF<sub>t</sub>/(1+r<sub>IRR</sub>)<sup>t</sup> = 0
- The calculation is based on the assumption that those cash flows can be reinvested at the same rate as the IRR.

4. Comparison of NPV and IRR

- Unlike NPV, IRR is independent of market conditions, making it less useful.
- NPV of any investment will be decreasing in the interest rate.
- Rate of NPV decline depends on the project.

## Bond

1. What is a bond?

- A bond is simply a tradable loan.
- A bond is traded so that the original owner of the bond can easily sell the bond in the secondary market.
- Often called debt securities or fixed income securities.
- Other features of a bond that are normally stated in advance:
  - The bond's maturity.
  - The bond's principal value or par or face value.
  - The bond's coupons: the interest payments.
  - There are onshore and offshore bonds.

2. Bond Pricing

- Par value: face value of a bond.
- Bond price: the sume of the present value of the coupon and the final payment. Discount vs Premium.
- The **yield** of a bond is that **discount rate** i.e. it is a single number used to discount all the cash flows accruing from a bond.
- To value a bond we must determine 3 things:
  - The value of the bond coupon payments, compared to bank interest payment (alternate investment)
  - The bond's face value
  - Time before maturity (when the full face value or principal of the bond is returned)
  - The bond price is higher if the coupon rate is larger than the discount rate.

3. Yield Curve

- A curve that plots several interest rates or yields across different maturities for a given borrower in a given currency. It is a line that plots the interest rates, at a set point in time, of bonds having equal credit quality, but differing maturity dates, i.e. how the yield curve changes over time (yield vs maturity).
- Yield to maturity, like IRR for bond.

4. Corporate bonds, defualt risk and ratings

- Default risk: the chance that companies or individuals will be unable to meet the requried payments on their debt obligations.
- Bond ratings assess bond issuer's credit worthiness/default risk.

5. Perpetual bonds

- A bond with no maturity date.
- A constant stream of identical cash flows forever.
- Can be thought of as equity (not debt) w/ formula for its PV.
- Price = Cashflow C / Discount Rate R

6. Holding Period Return

- The total return received from holding a bond over given a period.
- HPR = (I + P<sub>1</sub> - P<sub>0</sub>) / P<sub>0</sub>
  - I: interest from coupon payments
  - P<sub>0</sub>: the purchase price
  - P<sub>1</sub>: the price of the bond after one period later

## Equity

1. Equity vs Debt

- Equity (stocks or shares) is a form of finance for a company.
- Equity holders are residual claimants to the cash flows generated by a firm.
- Difference of equity and debts:
  - Ownership: it represents ownership of the firm.
  - Dividents: payments to shareholders come in the form of dividents, which is set by the firm itself.
  - Tax treatment: returns to shareholders are taxed, while interest to creditors are tax-free.
- The cash flows generated by shares drives the share value. -> **Divident + Capital Gain**
  - Current share price = Divident / Discount Rate (like perpetual bond), but this formula is not very useful as dividend usually changes.
- Divident payments are strictly dependent on the success of the firm in generating profits.

2. Measures of Return and Risk

- Positive relationship between expected risk and expected return.
- Negative relationship between expected return and recently realized historical return.
- Historical realized returns can be poor guide to future expected returns.
- Risk/Volatility: a measure of the dispersion of returns for a given security or market index.

3. Equity Valuation

- Equity investors like to believe there is a strong relationship between prices and fundamentals.
- By examining index (e.g. S&P500) we can estimate equity return premium using constant perpetuity discount formula.
- Dividing today's index value by recent dividends gives an implied discount rate.

4. Rationalizing Bubbles

- Discount rate uncertainty dramatically illustrated in market bubbles.
- Allowing dividends to grow in perpetuity gives more realistic equity PV, which imposes structure to avoid equity bubbles.
  - Growing perpetuity: series of payments growing at steady rate forever.

## Diversification

1. Diversification Opportunities

- Risk can be hedged away through diversification strategies.
- Systematic risk cannot be diverisified away.
- There is diversification advantage when assets are uncorrelated.
- Idiosyncratic risk, or residual risk, one that is not dependent on broad market returns, aggregate income, unemployment rate etc. Therefore something that lends itself best to a diversification strategy.
- Portfolio/efficient frontier: Return % vs Risk % (standard deviation), any investment above the efficient frontier is not possible. The closer the investment approaches the top-left of the graph, the more it will be preferred.

2. Portfolio Volatility

- Calculate the correlation bewteen two assets:
  - from statistics
- Portfolio volatility:
  - Two securities A and B, with weight w and standard deviation sigma and covariance Q.
  - Variance of the portfolio = w<sub>A</sub><sup>2</sup>sigma<sub>A</sub><sup>2</sup> + w<sub>B</sub><sup>2</sup>sigma<sub>B</sub><sup>2</sup> + 2w<sub>A</sub><sup>2</sup>w<sub>B</sub><sup>2</sup>sigma<sub>A</sub><sup>2</sup>sigma<sub>B</sub><sup>2</sup>Q
  - Volatility is the squre root of portfolio variance.
- Since all assets are related in a systematic way, it is only possible to reduce the overall volatility to a certain level.

3. Time-varying Correlations

- When investing many assets at the same time, the dynamic correlations between these assets' returns over time are also very important.
- When changing correlations between asset returns are high, loss in one asset is likely to be accompanies by loss in others.

## CAPM

1. Introduction

- Capital asset pricing model, used to determine a theoretically appropriate required rate of return of an asset.
- **Standard deviation** measures the total risk of an asset while **beta** only measures its contribution to systematic risk.
- CAPM implies the asset is to be added to an already well diversified portfolio.
- Systematic risk is captured by the co-movement of an asset with the market.
- **beta**:
  - It signfies whether the investment is more volatile than the market.
  - beta = 0: unaffected by the market.
  - beta < 0: inverse relation to the market.
  - beta < 1: less volatile than the market.
  - beta > 1: more volatile than the market.
  - Expected returns are related to beta and not to standard deviation or variance.

2. Calculating Beta

- beta<sub>i</sub> = cov(R<sub>i</sub>, R<sub>m</sub>) / var(R<sub>m</sub>)
  - m: market
- Can be modelled using linear regression. The returns of the investment as y and market returns as x.
